before there ever was a YouTube channel
called a ballet CL I had a blog that was
called vegan mind tricks now some people
have insinuated that there's something
improper or menacing about that moniker
about vegan mindtree I think it's a cute
name but one of the things I did on that
channel in pekin mind tricks and it's
something I have done here on YouTube a
couple of times not all the time but
from time to time I did talk through
with people the kind of strategy and
tactics of the real-life face-to-face
debates that they had involving veganism
um no real life debates the reason why I
put emphasis that is we're not talking
about an academic debate very often
you're talking about a confrontation
with a co-worker like maybe somebody at
the cafeteria at work who denigrates you
or insults you or picks a fight with you
about veganism maybe it's a
long-standing debate or conflict you
have with your own parents with your own
boyfriend with your own girlfriend maybe
your negotiating relationships in your
life that have really changed maybe you
just have a friend maybe there's no love
involved either so let's say you just
have an old friend and for decades
you've been going to baseball games
together and it used to be that baseball
and beer and hot dogs were part of your
friendship and then things change
because you become vegan and now maybe
all those things are in question the
baseball and the beer but most obviously
the hot dogs are out the picture so a
lot of people have friction in their
lives they have confrontations sometimes
very intimate sometimes in the workplace
etc etc um put to those questions of
strategy and tactics they really change
depending on the situation and it's not
a matter of just standing up and in a
shrill voice testifying or protesting or
preaching veganism a lot of the time
there's a very nuanced push and pull
we're really what you're trying to
accomplish is to get other people to
respect you and to hopefully keep that
relationship going long term in a way
that's really workable and as some level
of mutual respect where they respect
your reasons for being a vegan even if
they're never going to become vegan
themselves because let's face it folks
ninety-nine point nine percent of people
in our lives are never going to become
vegan and we got to look at that day
after day no matter how good a job we do
giving voice to our convictions for the
reasons for why we care
reasons why this is so important for us
so in this video I'm kind of going back
to my old Steve's gonna want to talk
about two well really one little logical
trap that people tend to lay for you and
this one is interesting because I see it
on going within the vegan movement as
well as Outsiders criticizing veganism
you know it says you're funny thing when
philosophically people will say to you
well there's nothing inherently wrong
with eating meat or a vegetarian may
argue there's nothing inherently wrong
with eating milk or eating eggs now I'm
not going to start off by saying that
arguments of this kind are always
completely idiotic there's a range I'm
going back to ancient Greek philosophy
in Europe you did actually have debates
about whether or not eating a basically
roadkill they did not have roadkill and
integrates but the equivalent of road
kill an animal that had died anyway or a
human being that it died anyway there
were actually we have records of
philosophical debates about cannibalism
to say well if a person has died of old
age and animal is that of old age what
are the ethical questions surrounding
eating that animal I nobody hunted it
nobody killed it it wasn't raised on a
farm you just have this corpse lying
there anyway now the progress of modern
science has made that kind of debate all
but obsolete there's almost no question
today about anybody that for among other
things cannibalism we now know is not
good for your health so cannibalism is
dropped off the map but I just put that
in as a caveat it's possible that
someone is raising those issues for
reasons that are not shallow that are
not insincere that are not caddy that
they actually want to object to or
debate aspects of vegan ethics from that
perspective of thinking about roadkill
of thinking about animals that have died
of old age anyway obviously nobody is
going to a baseball game and buying a
hot dog that's made at a roadkill
nobody's going to a baseball game and
buying a non-vegan I don't know
hamburger made entirely out of wild
animals that were never lived on it
never raised on a farm that frolic
freely in the wild until they eventually
died of disease or old age were
predation by another animal didn't have
a human being chopped up their corpse
and turned it into hamburger much I
don't care anyone even talk about that
in future but you might have noticed in
my recent discussion of this book Joe
opolis that book you know supposedly a
pro animal rights book supposedly having
an intellectual approach to veganism
animal rights ecology it was using this
type of logical reasoning to claim there
is nothing inherently wrong with eating
me there's nothing inherently or
intrinsically wrong with eating eggs
with eating milk now when I talk with
that face to face so again not an
academic context maybe it's someone who
knows me someone who loves me someone is
my friend or girlfriend or whatever it
is um I think it's really a the tactic i
use is to in a not insulting way uh you
know trying to keep it respectful and
polite to ask them how much different
would that sentence be if i took the
word intrinsically out of it now not all
of you know this the opposite of
extrinsically is extrinsic lee you know
what you're really saying without even
having to use that vocabulary is what
really is your claim if there's nothing
intrinsically wrong with it then you
must be insinuating that there's
something extrinsic lee wrong with it or
if we don't know that word that you're
saying non intrinsically there is
something else wrong with it there's
something extraneous that's wrong with
it so let's focus on that let's actually
spell out clearly what that is so if and
when people do say that to me they said
is there's nothing intrinsically wrong
with eating me there's nothing
inherently wrong with meeting me I asked
them okay so how much different would
you out how much difference is there
between what you've just said and if i
delete that fancy word and we just say
there's nothing wrong with eating meat
or there's nothing wrong with drinking
milk you know and what I'm doing is
inviting them to really spell out what
their position is now they may come back
and say they think there's nothing wrong
with it as long as the animal lived a
happy life they may say there's nothing
wrong with it as long as it's free range
they may then come back with explaining
whatever their position is and you know
that puts you I think in the position to
instead of addressing a completely
ridiculous claim to simply state what
you're
feelings are in the matter why it is
that this matters to you so much to talk
about your own values to talk about who
you are talk about why you've chosen a
moral path in life that doesn't include
that kind of compromise I can imagine
situations in which I would compromise
you're on a desert island etc um I'm not
living on a desert island right now
right uh I do see a kind of weird
parallel to this these claims that
there's nothing intrinsically wrong with
there's something heroine when people
try to so I mean so what's interesting
about that I don't want to use too much
philosophical jargon here in using
language like intrinsically and
inherently they're they're engaging in
what's called essentialism so what this
entails is a worldview in which some
acts are intrinsically evil are
inherently wrong and others are not so
probably anyone you meet in real life
doesn't actually believe this but some
people would believe that it is
intrinsically wrong to kill a human
being because a human being has an
intrinsic soul this is very medieval way
of seeing the world you'll I don't know
if they're ever encountered some to
believe this there as an animal to kill
an animal is only extrinsically wrong
because the animal does not have a soul
so what they say reality if you actually
ask someone what they mean if you move
past this veneer a philosophical
language I think you're almost never
going to encounter that being there
their reason or their rationale probably
they're going to fall back on animal
welfare as position a happy meet
position of saying as long as the animal
lives a good life then eating its corpse
is a-ok this this kind of approach I
think it's also interesting that people
take a sort of strange essentializing
position when they approach these
problems by telling you that blank is a
construct so this is short for blank is
a social construct you if you thi hang
around university educated people you
probably heard this a lot in last 10
years so they say things like gender is
a social construct social i don't know
differently wealth and poverty is a
social construct any concept that they
want to keeps going on they will just
fill in the blank and is a social
contract or just is a construct for
short now again this
actually falls back on the same
essentialist manner of thinking their
claim implicitly is some things some
ideas are constructs or social
constructs and others are not others
have essential or intrinsic value now
I've had to address this in the last 10
years I guess 10 years this has been
popular from a variety of different
perspectives but I mean you know
fundamentally my response to this is so
what I'm going to come back to I think
is also so what is actually for a lot of
arguments so what is is a really good
way to to respond because the initial
argument is so weak that you don't need
anything a lot fancier than that um if
the difference between Cambodia and
Vietnam is a social construct so what
it's true there's nothing essential
there's nothing intrinsic you can walk
through the swamp you can walk along the
stretch of land where the invisible line
is that separates Vietnam from Cambodia
there's nothing intrinsic there's
nothing inherent in that land that makes
one side Vietnam and once I can but
guess what millions of people are
willing to lay down their lives to fight
to the death over the location that line
over the difference between Vietnam and
Cambodia and if you look back at the
last 1000 years they have a very long
history of contesting where one country
stops and the other country starts you
know of the competition between empires
and also for Cambodia mostly this has
been a struggle to survive to not be
overwhelmed by Vietnam for the last
several centuries they've been largely
on the losing side of those battles um
so what are you actually saying what is
the what is the power what is what is
the effect of your claim if you tell me
there's no inherent or intrinsic
difference between Cambodia and Vietnam
really so what now again actually vegans
use this type of reasoning sometimes
when we try to argue there is no
inherent or intrinsic difference between
a cow and a pig or between a pig and a
dog we also do engage in this line of
argument and it's not always completely
meaningless but a you know if your claim
is there's nothing intrinsically wrong
with eating meat so what and watch where
i go with this because i don't use this
in an aggressive or insulting way okay
if there is nothing intrinsically wrong
with eating chicken eggs is only
something extrinsic lee wrong because
chicken eggs have no soul maybe that's
really what they believe or maybe it's
more of this animal welfare spizz ition
there's nothing intrinsically wrong if
the chicken led a happy life is going ok
if your claim is there's nothing
intrinsically wrong with chicken acts
it's only extrinsic what about doing the
best you can do is compromising with the
industrial manufacturer of chicken eggs
or even the organic free-range
manufacture connects is that the best I
can do I'm not really interested in the
question of whether or not an egg has a
soul I'm not really interested in the
question between the difference between
extrinsic and intrinsic evil how what is
the difference between eating and human
beings eggs and eating a chicken's eggs
or murder a human being and murdering a
cow I am actually interested in doing
the best I can so if I believe I can do
the best I can not by just eating less
meat but by eating zero that's one
example of doing the best they can if i
think i can do less harm I can be a
better person I can help make the world
a better place not just by eating
organic free-range eggs but by eating
absolutely no eggs why wouldn't I do the
best that i can write and so now the
other size in the position of having to
argue why is it whether it's on the
basis of this kind of fancy
philosophical language or otherwise why
are they putting forward an argument
that is basically an argument against
doing the best you can that's my advice